<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><!DOCTYPE html><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xmlns:mml="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML"><head><title>BITS2EPUB</title><meta charset="UTF-8"/><meta content="bits2epub v.1.0.24" name="generator"/><link href="../Styles/cup-bits-epub3.css" media="all" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
<!-- kobo-style -->
<script xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" type="text/javascript" src="../../js/kobo.js"/>
<style xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" type="text/css" id="koboSpanStyle">.koboSpan { -webkit-text-combine: inherit; }</style>

</head><body class="front-matter-part half-title-page" id="HT-fnmp-1"><div class="named-book-part-body"><p class="half-title-title noindent"><a id="page_i"/><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.1.1">Using Geochemical Data</span></p><p class="blurb"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.2.1">This textbook is a complete rewrite and expansion of Hugh Rollinson</span><span class="unicode-altfont-DejaVuSans"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.3.1">’</span></span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.4.1">s highly successful 1993 book </span><span class="italic"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.5.1">Using Geochemical Data: Evaluation, Presentation, Interpretation</span></span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.6.1">. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.6.2">Rollinson and Pease</span><span class="unicode-altfont-DejaVuSans"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.7.1">’</span></span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.8.1">s new book covers the explosion in geochemical thinking over the past three decades, as new instruments and techniques have come online. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.8.2">It provides a comprehensive overview of how modern geochemical data are used in the understanding of geological and petrological processes. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.8.3">It covers major element, trace element, and radiogenic and stable isotope geochemistry. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.8.4">It explains the potential of many geochemical techniques, provides examples of their application, and emphasizes how to interpret the resulting data. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.8.5">Additional topics covered include the critical statistical analysis of geochemical data, current geochemical techniques, effective display of geochemical data, and the application of data in problem solving and identifying petrogenetic processes within a geological context. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.8.6">It will be invaluable for all graduate students, researchers and professionals using geochemical techniques.</span></p><p class="bio"><span class="bold"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.9.1">Hugh Rollinson</span></span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.10.1"> is Emeritus Professor of Earth Sciences at the University of Derby. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.10.2">His particular interest is in the application of geochemistry to the early history of the Earth, and he has published on the geochemistry of Archaean rocks from Scotland, Sierra Leone, Zimbabwe, India, west Greenland and Russia.</span></p><p class="bio"><span class="bold"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.11.1">Victoria Pease</span></span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.12.1"> is Professor of Tectonics and Magmatism at Stockholm University. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.12.2">Her research focuses on unravelling Arctic tectonics. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.12.3">She sits on a number of international committees and is a chief editor of </span><span class="italic"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.13.1">Precambrian Research</span></span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.14.1">.</span></p></div></body></html>