<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><!DOCTYPE html><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xmlns:mml="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML"><head><title>viiPreface to the Second Edition</title><meta charset="UTF-8"/><meta content="bits2epub v.1.0.24" name="generator"/><link href="../Styles/cup-bits-epub3.css" media="all" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
<!-- kobo-style -->
<script xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" type="text/javascript" src="../../js/kobo.js"/>
<style xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" type="text/css" id="koboSpanStyle">.koboSpan { -webkit-text-combine: inherit; }</style>

</head><body class="preface" id="FMT-prf-1"><header><h1 class="FMT"><a id="page_vii"/><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.1.1">Preface to the Second Edition</span></h1></header><div class="named-book-part-body"><p><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.2.1">It is now more than 25 years since the publication of the first edition of </span><span class="italic"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.3.1">Using Geochemical Data</span></span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.4.1"> and in that time the field of geochemistry has expanded exponentially. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.4.2">In part this is because the application of the Earth Sciences has also expanded but in addition geochemistry now touches every aspect of the Earth sciences and overflows into related disciplines such as geomorphology and archaeology. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.4.3">Geochemistry itself has grown and now has well established subdisciplines such as cosmochemistry, environmental geochemistry, biogeochemistry and exploration geochemistry.</span></p><p><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.5.1">In this new and expanded edition of </span><span class="italic"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.6.1">Using Geochemical Data</span></span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.7.1"> our primary focus is still petrological, although we have sought to be inclusive of the new areas of geochemistry that have developed over the past 25 years. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.7.2">In particular we have sought to accommodate the vast array of new technological developments that have taken place in geochemistry, and these are briefly reviewed below.</span></p><p><span class="italic"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.8.1">The development of new technologies</span></span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.9.1"> and the improvement of existing technologies now provide better quality geochemical data, for a wider range of elements and isotope systems, more rapidly than before and at high spatial resolution. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.9.2">We now have routine access to inductively coupled plasma-based analytical tools, in particular, inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry which has contributed massively to the increase in high-quality trace element and isotope data. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.9.3">In addition, a range of high-resolution in-situ microbeam methods have been developed to include ion probes and laser probes which allow the detailed within-grain mapping of trace elements and isotopes.</span></p><p><span class="italic"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.10.1">The development of new geochemical techniques</span></span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.11.1">. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.11.2">Since the first edition of this book a number of isotopic techniques have moved from the domain of a few highly specialised laboratories to being much more widely used. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.11.3">In part this can be attributed to some of the new technologies now available as mentioned above. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.11.4">We now routinely see radiogenic isotope data from the Re-Os and Lu-Hf systems reported, and results for the short-lived radiogenic Nd and W isotopes are widely used in early Earth studies. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.11.5">The field of stable isotope geochemistry has expanded to include nitrogen and a vast array of what have been termed the </span><span class="unicode-altfont-DejaVuSans"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.12.1">‘</span></span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.13.1">non-traditional</span><span class="unicode-altfont-DejaVuSans"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.14.1">’</span></span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.15.1"> stable isotope systems. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.15.2">The field of zircon isotope geochemistry has exploded from being an area of minority interest within geochronology to being a major contributor to geochemical models of crustal growth and in which individual zircon grains are mined for the isotopic and trace element information that they hold.</span></p><p><span class="italic"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.16.1">An expanded experimental and theoretical understanding of geochemical data</span></span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.17.1">. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.17.2">Our understanding of how geochemical processes operate has continued to grow through the contribution of the results of experimental petrology. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.17.3">Alongside this there has been a growth in the thermodynamic modelling of geochemical systems, built on the results of experimental petrology, but expanded into areas that have previously not been experimentally investigated. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.17.4">This approach has been applied across the field of geochemistry to include the behaviour of major and trace elements in melts, the partitioning of trace elements between minerals and melt, the understanding of metamorphic reactions and fluid chemistry. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.17.5">These approaches have a great predictive power and allow models of physical processes to be built which replicate measured geochemical data.</span></p><p><span class="italic"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.18.1">Better approaches to the statistical treatment of geochemical data</span></span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.19.1">. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.19.2">As was emphasised in the first edition of this book, the way in which geochemists use their data, particularly major element chemical data, is a source of great concern to statisticians. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.19.3">In this edition we discuss the more robust approaches to using geochemical data in the light of advances in the field of geostatistics. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.19.4">We also review the misapplication of tectonic discrimination diagrams and seek to put the users of geochemical data back on track.</span></p><p><span class="italic"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.20.1">A revolution in computing technology.</span></span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.21.1"> The first edition of this book was written without any access to the internet. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.21.2">In the intervening years the explosion in computing technologies has meant the emergence of large geochemical databases, the growth of </span><span class="unicode-altfont-DejaVuSans"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.22.1">‘</span></span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.23.1">big data</span><span class="unicode-altfont-DejaVuSans"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.24.1">’</span></span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.25.1"> and a huge increase in the number of software packages available, which have allowed massive progress in the rapid processing of analytical data and the analysis of geochemical data sets. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.25.2">With relatively easy </span><a id="page_viii"/><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.26.1">access to large data sets we find ourselves in the </span><span class="unicode-altfont-DejaVuSans"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.27.1">‘</span></span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.28.1">big data</span><span class="unicode-altfont-DejaVuSans"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.29.1">’</span></span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.30.1"> era: an area of geochemistry which has probably not yet reached full maturity and in our view requires some careful management.</span></p><p><span class="italic"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.31.1">An explosion in the geochemical literature</span></span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.32.1">. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.32.2">Coupled with the rise in computer technology and the wide access to the geochemical literature online has come an increase in the volume of geochemical literature. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.32.3">In the intervening years there have been two editions of </span><span class="italic"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.33.1">The Treatise on Geochemistry</span></span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.34.1">, other online encyclopaedias, new journals and an array of specialist textbooks.</span></p><p><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.35.1">So where does this book fit in? </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.35.2">We have modified the title slightly to reflect what we would argue is the focus of all modern geochemistry: an understanding of processes. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.35.3">Nevertheless, the principal purpose of the book remains the same and is a guide to the user of geochemical data to obtain meaning from their data. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.35.4">Albeit expanded, the basic principles of geochemistry remain the same; the focus is primarily petrological, reflecting the background of the authors; and previous users of the book will recognise that the basic structure of the book remains the same. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.35.5">However, the book is longer, is better illustrated and, as indicated, is updated in every area with extensive reference to the modern literature. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.35.6">There are a number of detailed and specialist geochemical texts, to which we refer and acknowledge with gratitude, but this text is deliberately broad and aimed at the graduate student to assist in the manipulation and interpretation of their data and to assist in the process of obtaining geological meaning from geochemical data. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.35.7">Our experience tells us that this text has also been widely used by professional geologists and geochemists in many disciplines as a guide to areas of geochemistry which are not their specialisation. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.35.8">We hope that this will continue to be the case.</span></p><p><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.36.1">At a personal level we are grateful to the many individuals who have assisted in this revision. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.36.2">In particular, VP wishes to thank colleagues who generously answered what must have seemed to be apparently random questions (A. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.36.3">Hoffman, W. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.36.4">White, A. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.36.5">Kemp, C. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.36.6">Fedo) and a special thanks to M. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.36.7">Whitehouse who got the brunt of these. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.36.8">At Cambridge University Press we appreciate Matt Lloyd</span><span class="unicode-altfont-DejaVuSans"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.37.1">’</span></span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.38.1">s enthusiasm and support for this project, without which it might have floundered, and we appreciate Sarah Lambert</span><span class="unicode-altfont-DejaVuSans"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.39.1">’</span></span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.40.1">s patience. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.40.2">We are also grateful to colleagues at the Faraday Institute for Science and Religion in Cambridge through whom we had access to the University of Cambridge library, and for a visiting fellowship for VP to St Edmund</span><span class="unicode-altfont-DejaVuSans"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.41.1">’</span></span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.42.1">s College Cambridge and to colleagues at CASP for an office and administrative support during VP</span><span class="unicode-altfont-DejaVuSans"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.43.1">’</span></span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.44.1">s fellowship period in Cambridge. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.44.2">VP thanks Hugh for allowing her to be a part of this endeavour </span><span class="unicode-altfont-DejaVuSans"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.45.1">–</span></span> <span class="unicode-altfont-DejaVuSans"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.46.1">‘</span></span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.47.1">as a heavy user of the first edition, I am looking forward to the second!</span><span class="unicode-altfont-DejaVuSans"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.48.1">’</span></span></p><p><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.49.1">HR wishes to thank his co-author Victoria Pease for the encouragement to both begin and complete this revised edition. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.49.2">The observant reader of the first edition might wonder what became of A, E, O and P in the intervening years and so it is pleasing to report that each has found success in life without any reference to geochemistry. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.49.3">P remains my constant source of encouragement and I cannot express enough my thanks for her support over these many months.</span></p></div></body></html>