<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><!DOCTYPE html><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xmlns:mml="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML"><head><title>ixPreface to the First Edition</title><meta charset="UTF-8"/><meta content="bits2epub v.1.0.24" name="generator"/><link href="../Styles/cup-bits-epub3.css" media="all" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
<!-- kobo-style -->
<script xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" type="text/javascript" src="../../js/kobo.js"/>
<style xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" type="text/css" id="koboSpanStyle">.koboSpan { -webkit-text-combine: inherit; }</style>

</head><body class="preface" id="FMT-prf-2"><header><h1 class="FMT"><a id="page_ix"/><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.1.1">Preface to the First Edition</span></h1></header><div class="named-book-part-body"><p><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.2.1">Pascal once wrote </span><span class="unicode-altfont-DejaVuSans"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.3.1">‘</span></span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.4.1">the last thing that we discover in writing a book is to know what to put at the beginning</span><span class="unicode-altfont-DejaVuSans"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.5.1">’</span></span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.6.1">. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.6.2">In my case this is particularly so, for what excuse have I as a single author for venturing into the fields of so many experts in an attempt to explain the methodologies of the main subdisciplines of geochemistry. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.6.3">This same problem was acknowledged by Goldschmidt in the preface to his classic 1954 text on geochemistry. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.6.4">Today of course the problem is compounded, for geochemistry has a multitude of relatively new and comparatively narrow fields. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.6.5">We find experts in X-ray fluorescence and plasma emission techniques, those who specialise in the lead isotopes of zircon and the isotope systematics of argon. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.6.6">This specialisation is necessary for the technologies of such techniques are complex. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.6.7">Nevertheless, for some there needs to be an overview of the main range of techniques, for there are many workers who wish to understand the potential of geochemical techniques and intelligently interpret the results. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.6.8">That such an overview does not exist is my chief defence. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.6.9">This text is not original in the ideas that it conveys, rather it is original in the sense that it brings together a wide range of ideas and methods from the geochemical literature.</span></p><p><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.7.1">The principal emphasis in this book is on </span><span class="unicode-altfont-DejaVuSans"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.8.1">‘</span></span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.9.1">whole-rock</span><span class="unicode-altfont-DejaVuSans"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.10.1">’</span></span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.11.1"> chemistry and the equally large area of mineral chemistry has only been touched upon tangentially. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.11.2">Furthermore, it has not been possible to cover some of the more novel and esoteric techniques currently being applied to geochemical investigations.</span></p><p><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.12.1">This text was conceived as a work to be put into the hands of a graduate student embarking upon a geochemical project. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.12.2">As it has evolved however, it has become apparent that it serves many more purposes. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.12.3">It may, for example, be used as a text in final-year and graduate-student geochemistry courses. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.12.4">It will be useful to the professional geochemist who has worked chiefly in one subdiscipline of the subject and needs to look more broadly at a problem. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.12.5">It will also be of use to the non-geochemist, whether in academia, industry or a geological survey, who has access to geochemical data and needs to interpret it.</span></p><p><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.13.1">This book has therefore two main goals. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.13.2">The first is to put into the hands of a non-expert, who needs to make use of geochemical data, a summary of the methods and techniques currently used in geochemistry. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.13.3">And yet a text which will enable the user to obtain something of geological significance from the data. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.13.4">The second goal is to put within one cover the disparate techniques and methodologies currently in use by geochemists. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.13.5">Thus, this text may be read at two levels. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.13.6">First, it may be read by a geochemist with data who wishes to evaluate and interpret that data. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.13.7">Second, it may be read by a geologist or geochemist who wants to understand some of the current geochemical jargon and make sense of the geochemical literature.</span></p><p><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.14.1">The reader will detect a number of biases in this text which are an inevitable consequence of the author</span><span class="unicode-altfont-DejaVuSans"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.15.1">’</span></span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.16.1">s geological interests. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.16.2">The first bias is towards examples chosen from the Archaean, which is the area of geology in which the author has principally worked and evident also from the place of writing. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.16.3">The second bias is towards igneous and metamorphic petrology, which again is the author</span><span class="unicode-altfont-DejaVuSans"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.17.1">’</span></span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.18.1">s field of interest, but also the area in which many of the methods described were first applied.</span></p><p><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.19.1">I am grateful to many colleagues for their assistance during the preparation of this book. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.19.2">Particular thanks go to Jan Kramers, Gordon Lampitt, Alex Woronow, David Lowry, Ken Eriksson, Kevin Walsh and my late colleague Thorley Sweetman for reading various sections of the text. </span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.19.3">Final thanks must go to Patricia my wife for her tolerance of the back of my head for so many months whilst seated at this keyboard and to Amy, Oliver and Edward for their patient encouragement of </span><span class="unicode-altfont-DejaVuSans"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.20.1">‘</span></span><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.21.1">how many chapters to go Dad?</span><span class="unicode-altfont-DejaVuSans"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.22.1">’</span></span></p><p class="end-author-date"><span class="italic"><span xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" class="koboSpan" id="kobo.23.1">May 1992, University of Zimbabwe</span></span></p></div></body></html>